---
layout: post
title: The Barputer
date: '2020-01-20T21:59:46-08:00'
author: BikeBoy
---

{% newthought "A few years ago" %} (2005, see blog
post), Frosty and I came up with
the notion of a small,
inexpensive device that one
could take to the bar, or
elsewhere, without feeling like
you were risking an expensive
laptop or iPad - with a focus on
writing (of code, or words)
rather than web-surfing or game-playing. We coined the term "barputer" to
describe this concept.
<!--more--> .

I sketched out the basic elements at the time: a system-on-chip (SoC) computer,
small but high-res display, and a high-quality but small bluetooth keyboard.
I figured all of those items were available. At the time, they were - but not
_quite_ in the form or capability I envisioned. They all had one (or more)
issue to contend with, that made the concept more difficult to realize than
I thought.

And so the barputer idea went on
the back burner. But, every year
or so, it rotated to the
forefront of my backlog of
ideas, and we toyed with it
again - were the necessary
components ready yet? Were the
features we wanted still the
necessary ones? Each year, we
affirmed the concept, and that
it was not _quite_ ready to be
(easily) built.

Meanwhile, the Hemingwrite (now
Astrohaus [Freewrite](https://getfreewrite.com)) went to
Kickstarter, and then the
commercial market, and it had
some interesting similarities,
at least for writing. So, too,
did the significantly-older
Alphasmart Neo/Dana line of
writing devices, now out of
production. Highly
portable, distraction-free,
purpose-built, with a keyboard
suitable to pounding out lots of
characters. However,the
Alphasmart is long gone, and the
Freewrite is pricey, and
_totally_ oriented to
stream-of-thought writing, with
no option to edit, and no
accommodation for somewhat
different use-cases like writing
code. I also feel the Freewrite
design locks users in to a very
specific and somewhat limiting
application. For those with that
very particular use, it is
glorious; for everyone else, it
is a toy, with potentially
fatal flaws.

The pieces I was looking for
eventually came along - and
while they all continue to
improve, the threshhold has
now been crossed! In particular,
we now have, readily available and 
off the shelf:

- Raspberry Pi Zero W: tiny and
  cheap (`$15 USD) but can run a
  full Linux-based OS, with all
  the tools a writer or coder
  might want.Includes both WiFi
  and Bluetooth.

- Pimoroni's Hyperpixel high-res
  touchscreen display, that
  plugs right in to the Pi Zero.
  This allows 4-inch display
  that blows away anything
  previously available, the
  options for which were either
  significantly smaller,
  lower-resolution, or both.
  Larger HDMI displays have been
  around for a while, but they
  all needed a cable or creative
  wiring to connect to a Pi, and
  larger = more power
  consumption. The Hyperpixel
  display hits the sweet spot -
  big enough to be useful, high
  res so the text looks good,
  small enough to be highly
  portable, relatively low power
  consumption, touch screenso
  you don't _really_ need a
  mouse.

- Compact Bluetooth mechanical
  keyboards (like the RK61 and
  similar) - these "60%"
  keyboards are small enough to
  be readily portable, and
  include proper full-travel
  keys that make typing for
  hours a much more satisfying
  prospect. "Gamer" keyboards
  have been around for a while,
  and in the compact format too,
  but the magic combo with
  Bluetooth finally makes it
  work for the "barputer"
  concept.
 
I wrestled a bit with whether to
put a battery inside the case,
or not. Incorporating a battery
would mean the total package is
smaller, as I could use a flat
LiIon battery; but I would need
to add a battery charge /
voltage booster board, and then
the barputer would be dependent
on the juice in that one
battery. I decided that it would
be more flexible to use an
external battery-bank - these
incorporate a charge controller
and boost converter into a tidy
package, which makes it easy to
swap batteries. You can choose a
smaller battery pack for
portability, or use a big
honking one for all-day (or
potentially _days_) of use, or
even use a pack that runs on
18650 cells - and then carry a
few extra, charge them from a
solar panel, or whatever. Having
the power supply independent of
the barputer itself would also
give the most flexibility for
the future.

With the components and layout
chosen, I ordered up the parts
and set about designing a
3D-printed case.  I wanted it to
be as slim as possible, but
substantial enough to protect
the display (the most expensive
component of the device, by
far!) The Pi Zero doesn't run
very hot, but a little
convective cooling doesn't hurt,
so I incorporated vent holes on
two sides. I chose the sides
such that the case could sit in
either landscape or portrait
orientation, as I wasn't yet
sure which would work best with
the small screen. What I quickly
came to realize, is that the
case needs to provide some means
to prop the thing up at a slight
angle - neither completely
vertical nor horizontal (flat on
the desk) really works well for
viewing, but about 30 degrees
tilt is ergonomically wonderful.

Once everything was put
together, and the Raspbian OS
installed and basically
configured (e.g. with wifi
password, locale, language and
keyboard layout) I was able to
fire it up and connect via ssh,
so I could then install the
necessary display drivers from
Pimoroni. Rebooting, the display
came right up with the graphical
desktop, and I used the
touchscreen to start blutooth
and connect the keyboard -- this
all worked fine, with no hiccups
(somewhat to my surprise!).

The standard LXTerminal uses a
fontsize that is pretty small to
look at on the small but
high-res display, and the
largest size available (32px) is
still not really big enough.
This led me to look for a
terminal program that would use
"modern" fonts; I found 'st'
from the Sucks Less team. It is
_very_ light-weight -- also a
good feature on a Pi Zero, which
just doesn't have much
resources. St doesn't offer much
in the way of bells and
whistles, though - no tabs, for
instance - so one needs to plan
to use a terminal multiplexer
like screen or tmux.

St plays nice with the window
manager to go full-screen.

With a decent terminal in hand,
I installed and configured the
other essentials for a barputer: vim and mutt (well, neomutt).
Vim is my go-to editor/IDE, and
I've spent a lot of time tuning
my configuration on other
systems, so I chose to duplicate
that on the barputer. Even if
one is trying to accomplish
"distraction-free"
writing/coding, it's very useful
to be able to access email even
at a basic level. For many,
Gmail is the default, and the Pi
Zero just isn't up to running
Google's bloated web browser
client. I tried to find a
command-line browser that would
work with Gmail, but web Gmail
is totally dependent on
Javascript; in theory there are
CLI browsers that can make it
work, but I haven't found
anything that works in practice,
let alone on a Pi.

So I now have my
fully-functioning "barputer" up
and running, well enough to be
writing this very blog post on
it... I'm sure there will be
additional tweaks and changes as
I get some experience on it, but
thus far I'm pretty happy with
the result.
